docs: Update architecture reference page (#1275)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/canonicalk8s/snap/explanation/architecture.md

understand how the software is structured. This documentation lays out the
current design of {{product}}, following the [C4 model].

## System context

This overview of {{product}} demonstrates the interactions of
Kubernetes with users and with other systems.

![cluster5][]

Two actors interact with the Kubernetes snap:

- **K8s admin**: The administrator of the cluster interacts directly with the
Kubernetes API server. Out of the box our K8s distribution offers admin
access to the cluster. That initial user is able to configure the cluster to
match their needs and of course create other users that may or may not have
admin privileges. The K8s admin is also able to maintain workloads running
in the cluster. If you deploy {{product}} from a snap, this is how the cluster
is manually orchestrated.

- **K8s user**: A user consuming the workloads hosted in the cluster. Users do
not have access to the Kubernetes API server. They need to access the cluster
through the options (nodeport, ingress, load-balancer) offered by the
administrator who deployed the workload they are interested in.

There are non-human users of the K8s snap, for example the [`k8s-operator

> charm`][K8s charm]. The K8s charm needs to drive the Kubernetes cluster and to
> orchestrate the multi-node clustering operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
charm`][K8s charm]. The K8s charm needs the snap to drive the Kubernetes cluster and to
orchestrate the multi-node clustering operations.
```

> A set of external systems need to be easily integrated with our K8s
> distribution. We have identified the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A set of external systems are easily integrated with our K8s
distribution. We have identified the following:
```

- **Load Balancer**: Although the K8s snap distribution comes with a

> load balancer, we expect the end customer environment will have a load balancer
> and thus we need to integrate with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
load balancer, we allow end users to bring their own load balancer solution.
```

- **Storage**: Kubernetes typically expects storage to be external to the

> cluster. The K8s snap comes with a local storage option but we still need to
> offer integration with any storage solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster. The K8s snap comes with a local storage option but also
allows integrations with alternative storage solutions.
```

- **Identity management**: Out of the box the K8s snap offers credentials for
an admin user. The admin user can complete the integration with any identity
management system available or do user management manually.
- **External datastore**: By default, Kubernetes uses etcd to keep track of

> state. Our K8s snap comes with `dqlite` as its datastore. We should however

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state. Our K8s snap comes with `Dqlite` as its datastore. We should however
```
Maybe insert a link here fo Dqlite?

> state. Our K8s snap comes with `dqlite` as its datastore. We should however
> be able to use any end client owned datastore installation. That should
> include an external `etcd`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state. Our K8s snap comes with `dqlite` as its datastore. However, we permit end client owned datastore installations such as the use of an external `etcd`.
```

## The k8s snap

Looking more closely at what is contained within the K8s snap itself:

![cluster1][]

The `k8s` snap distribution includes the following:

- **Kubectl**: through which users and other systems interact with Kubernetes
and drive the cluster operations.
- **K8s control plane**: These are all the Kubernetes services as well as core
workloads built from upstream and shipped in the snap.

> - **Kubernetes datastore**: uses dqlite to store data on the state of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Kubernetes datastore**: uses Dqlite to store data on the state of the
```

cluster. It can be replaced by an external datastore.

> - **Cluster datastore**: uses dqlite as a replicated database to store cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cluster datastore**: uses Dqlite as a replicated database to store cluster
```

configuration. It is used
by `k8sd` in order to carry out the orchestration of the additional Kubernetes

> components included in {{product}} we deem important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
components included in {{product}} such as cluster membership management.
```
That sounds a bit vague, how about this?

- **Runtime**: `containerd` is the shipped container runtime.
- **K8sd**: implements the operations logic and exposes that
functionality via CLIs and APIs.

## K8sd

K8sd is the component that implements and exposes the operations functionality
needed for managing the Kubernetes cluster.

![cluster2][]

At the core of the `k8sd` functionality we have the cluster manager that is

> responsible for configuring the services, workload and features we deem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
responsible for configuring the services, workloads and features 
```

important for a Kubernetes cluster. Namely:

- Kubernetes systemd services
- DNS
- CNI

> - ingress

Reviewer: Did we capitalize Ingress elsewhere in the docs?

- gateway API
- load-balancer
- local-storage
- metrics-server

The cluster manager is also responsible for implementing the formation of the

> cluster. This includes operations such as joining/removing nodes into the

Reviewer: Would a link for https://github.com/canonical/microcluster be to low-level for this architecture doc or do you think it should be included?

Author: I've added that we use Dqlite managed by Microcluster on the Ks datastore. Is that what you intended?  We haven't included microcluster in the architecture diagrams. Do you think we should?

Reviewer: Perfect!
